\chapter{Middle-level Intermediate Representation Translation and Optimization}
\label{chapter:mir-translation-optimization}

The previous chapter presented the SableWasm middle-level intermediate
representation (MIR), a static-single-assignment (SSA) control flow graph (CFG)
representation of a WebAssembly program. This chapter focuses on the translation
strategy used when lowering WebAssembly into the SableWasm MIR. We will first
start by presenting the translation patterns used and then discuss the analysis
and optimization framework.

\section{Translating WebAssembly to MIR}
\label{section:mir-translation}

In this section, we will cover the translation between WebAssembly bytecode and
SableWasm MIR. We have covered the design of SableWasm MIR instructions
previously. One may notice that for most of the instructions, especially for the
numerical operations, SableWasm MIR shares the same semantics as WebAssembly.
Hence, the translation rules for these instructions are pretty trivial, and we
will not cover them in detail in this section. Instead, this section will focus
on the translation rules for the structured control flow constructs and
WebAssembly instructions that require reduction during translation.

\input{Chapters/4.MIR/4.2.1.Structured-Control-Flow Construct}
\input{Chapters/4.MIR/4.2.2.Instruction Reduction}

\section{Analysis Framework}
\label{section:mir-opt}

\begin{figure}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{Images/4.MIR/analysis-framework.pdf}
    \caption{SableWasm MIR Analysis and Optimization Framework}
    \label{fig:sablewasm-mir-analysis-framework}
\end{figure}

SableWasm also implements an analysis and optimization framework over its
middle-level intermediate representation (MIR). The framework consists of two
parts, passes and drivers. The SableWasm analysis and transformation framework
only provides essential support for managing passes, compared to other more
advanced frameworks, such as McSAF\cite{mcsaf}, an optimization framework for
MATLAB language. Figure~\ref{fig:sablewasm-mir-analysis-framework} illustrates
the current state of the framework in SableWasm. Currently, we implement three
different drivers. \texttt{SimpleModulePassDriver} accepts module passes and
operates on the module level. At the time of thesis writing, we haven't explored
inter-procedural analysis for SableWasm MIR in detail, and the only module pass
implemented is the pretty-print pass. In the future, one can add additional
inter-procedural analyses to SableWasm, by implementing the \texttt{ModulePass}
interface. The second driver is the \texttt{SimpleFunctionPassDriver}. As its
name suggests, it manages \texttt{FunctionPass} instead. \texttt{FunctionPass}
implements intra-procedural analysis that operates over basic blocks. SableWasm
currently implements multiple intra-procedural analyses, such as dominator tree
construction. We will cover these passes in detail in this section. The last
driver in SableWasm is \texttt{SimpleForEachFunctionPassDriver} which is a
wrapper class for \texttt{SimpleFunctionPassDriver}. It works with
\texttt{FunctionPass} but takes a module as an argument.

\input{Chapters/4.MIR/4.3.1.Dominators and Dependence}
\input{Chapters/4.MIR/4.3.2.Control-Flow Graph Simplification}
\input{Chapters/4.MIR/4.3.3.Type Inference}