\subsection{Structured-Control-Flow Construct}

Translating from stack-based IR to register-based IR is not trivial, especially
when non-linear control flow structures appeared. This problem appeared in many
runtime system implementations, such as Numba \cite{numba}, a just-in-time (JIT)
compiler for Python. Usually, one needs some algorithm to recover the control
flow structure from annoying jump instructions. Luckily, in WebAssembly, we can
translate the stack-based bytecode into register-based basic blocks in linear
time, thanks to the structured-control-flow constructs and their validation
rules defined in WebAssembly. In this section, we will cover the translation
pattern used for WebAssembly's structured-control-flow constructs, namely
\texttt{block}, \texttt{if} and \texttt{loop}.

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{Images/4.MIR/translate-block.pdf}
  \caption{WebAssembly \texttt{block} translation pattern}
  \label{fig:translate-block}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{Images/4.MIR/translate-if.pdf}
  \caption{WebAssembly \texttt{if} translation pattern}
  \label{fig:translate-if}
\end{figure}

\paragraph{Block}
In the background chapter, we provide a general illustration of the three
structured-control-flow constructs. As a quick recap, \texttt{block} is the
simplest form of a structured-control-flow construct. It implicitly introduces
a label at the end of its enclosing instructions. A branching instruction
referring to this label will redirect the control flow to the end of the block.
Figure~\ref{fig:translate-block} illustrates the translation pattern for
WebAssembly \texttt{block} in SableWasm MIR. We will first clarify some of the
terminologies we used in the figure, and we will use the same terms later in
the \texttt{loop} and \texttt{if} pattern discussion. \emph{Expr Insert Point}
refer to the starting position for the generated instructions when we
recursively translate the instructions within the enclosing expression of the
\texttt{block} instruction. Furthermore, \emph{Label Insert Point} refer to the
position for generated instruction when we finish the recursive translation and
resume to the parent expression of the \texttt{block} instruction. A \emph{label
  stack entry} is a tuple consisting of a pointer to the landing BB, a list of
$\phi$ nodes expecting merge values, and a pointer to the \emph{label insert
  point}. The translation pattern for \texttt{block} is pretty simple; we
continue on the current BB and prepare the landing BB for the block instruction
as a branch instructions within the expression may refer to the label.
Additionally, to fully support multi-value extension in WebAssembly, we also
need to prepare the $\phi$ nodes in the landing BB. SableWasm generates the
$\phi$ nodes based on the type of the \texttt{block} instruction. WebAssembly
validation ensures that the expression within the \texttt{block} can access
exactly $m$ values from the stack and put $n$ values onto the stack. Finally,
we will append an unconditional branch to the landing BB because in WebAssembly,
if the control flow reaches the bottom of the \texttt{block} expressions, it
will implicitly fall through. For the operand stack, we will first pop $m$
values from the stack as \texttt{block} instruction's type suggests and push the
$\phi$ nodes as the result values. Now we need to set up the operand stack for
our the expression contained within the block. Again, due to the WebAssembly
validation rule, we need to insert a boundary before continuing.
Figure~\ref{fig:translate-block} represents this with the bold line in the
result operand value stack.


\paragraph{If}
The next control-flow structure defined WebAssembly is \texttt{if}.
WebAssembly's \texttt{if} is an expression instead of a statement that appears
in many other languages such as C. The \texttt{if} expression can yield some
values indicated by its type. Figure~\ref{fig:translate-if} illustrates the
translation patterns in SableWasm. There are two types of \texttt{if}
instruction defined in WebAssembly specification. The first case is a `partial'
\texttt{if} instruction, where it only contains the `true' branch. From
WebAssembly validation rules, it's easy to show that the only possible type is
\texttt{[i32]->[]}, even with the multi-value extension proposal. This implies
that the expression within the \texttt{if} instruction must start with an empty
operand stack. Hence, the translation pattern for the partial \texttt{if} is
quite straightforward: we only need to pop the condition value from the operand
stack and construct a conditional branch based on this value in the current BB.
On the other hand, we also have `full' \texttt{if} instructions with both `true'
expression and `false' expression. The validation rules ensure that both
expressions must have the same type. The translation pattern is more complex
compare to that of a `partial' \texttt{if}. In this case, we have to prepare the
landing BB similarly to what we did for the \texttt{block} construct. We need to
generate $n$ $\phi$ nodes for data-flow mergers from the true branch, the false
branch, and any possible branching instruction within both nested expressions.
Similarly, we need to pop $m$ values from the stack for operand values stack and
then push $n$ $\phi$ nodes. And, within both nested expressions, push $m$ values
back to the stack.

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{Images/4.MIR/translate-loop.pdf}
  \caption{WebAssembly \texttt{loop} translation pattern}
  \label{fig:translate-loop}
\end{figure}

\paragraph{Loop}
The last control-flow structure defined in WebAssembly is \texttt{loop}.
Figure~\ref{fig:translate-loop} gives a general illustration of SableWasm's
translation pattern for \texttt{loop} instructions. Similar to the `partial'
\texttt{if} we discussed in the previous paragraph, one can show that, under
WebAssembly's validation rules, the parameter types for the \texttt{loop}
instruction must equal to the result types. The \texttt{loop} instruction is
similar to the \texttt{block} instruction, except that if any branching
instruction refers to it, the branching instruction should transfer the control
flow to the start of the expression within the instruction instead of the end.
Thus, we need to prepare a standalone basic block for the nested expression in
\texttt{loop}, along with the $\phi$ nodes to merge value on each loop
iteration. Note that we also introduce $\phi$ nodes in the landing BB. One may
argue that there is no need for these $\phi$ nodes, as only one block can reach
the loop exit and no value merging will occur. Indeed, these $\phi$ nodes will
always be trivial $\phi$ nodes, which have only one possible value inflow.
However, this is due to the limitation of our translation framework.

In this section, we discussed the translation patterns for WebAssembly
structured control-flow constructs. Thanks to WebAssembly validation rules, the
types for these structured control-flow instructions explicitly mark value
merging and imply possible $\phi$ nodes. Furthermore, one can show that the
control graph generated above is indeed in SSA form. However, the directly
generated control flow graph is not easily understandable by users. This mainly
comes from two facts. First, the WebAssembly-targeting compiler may generate
awkward patterns to fit in the structured control-flow constructs. Second,
SableWasm translation patterns for structured-control flow constructs are not
optimal.